The Rose Apple Tree: In Praise of the Great Omniscient One Namo gurujñānāya. Adept in the realization of the primordially pure vast expanse (Longchen), Beyond mere platitudes, you have true omniscience. Consummately free and immaculate (Drimé), like the moon, Dispelling the torment of ego with your rays (Özer)-to you I bow! Eliminating idle chatter, indestructible tones From your indivisible central space resound. Gifts of tea or wine can't compare to your teachings that Hold scripture and realization like fragrant jasmine-to you I bow! In the midst of the Thus-Gone One's paths of the two truths, Just Dzogchen surpasses all other vehicles and beliefs. Knowing you're already free and don't need liberation again, Luxuriating continuously everywhere-to you I bow! Majestic as Venus, the nectars of aspiration and application Nourish you, as lilies blossom on your pāramitā path. On par with a wish-fulfilling jewel, you fulfill Perfectly all beings' hopes and desires-to you I bow! Quietly bearing the hardships of heat and cold, Roaming through pilgrimage sites and sealed places like Cāritra, Similar to the River Jahnu, your focus in development and completion flows- Tucked away like a fox alone in the mountains-to you I bow! Upon the ample vine of naturalness free from rigidity, Valiantly guiding us all to liberation, you bestow the Dharma Without dividing scriptures and realization, having amassed all knowledge eXactly like gathering trinkets in a box-to you I bow! You are like a yak horn that no speck of dust can blemish, Zestfully regaling villagers with benefit and happiness. With your new decrees of the ten bhūmis you bind All the murderous, flesh-eating, haughty chieftains-to you I bow! Having tasted the emptiness and bliss that exudes The sweet scent of hari, you grew into your prime In the unity of Ati, and intoxicated your consort, The noble lady Prajñāpāramitā-to you I bow! You've halted the currents of fleeting existence in the central channel, And ripened the maṇḍala of major and minor marks, the immutable three seats. Steadily reveling in the consummate, great wisdom, May you purify all realms and bring beings to maturity! Binding the object, the simplicity of emptiness With the subject, great bliss, May we reach the state free of alteration, Bliss-emptiness in union endowed with all supreme qualities! From the vast sea of devotion this cloud of verses arose, Letting down a pearlescent rain of virtue that I dedicate So that the scorching heat of suffering is allayed, And the lotus of innate liberation blossoms! This simple flower of praise of the Omniscient Second Buddha, with references to the narrative of his achievements, was composed quickly and spontaneously by Young Abhaya. 
